---
layout: post
title: A Rundown on PCOS
categories: PCOS
---

# What is polycistic ovary syndrome or PCOS?

It is a common condition that affects how a woman's ovaries work.

The 3 main features of PCOS are the following.

- Irregular periods.
- Your ovaries get bigger and have lots of small fluid-filled sacs (called follicles) around the eggs. Despite the name, you don’t actually have cysts if you have PCOS.
- High levels of "male" hormones in your body (androgen), which may cause physical signs such as excess facial or body hair.

If you have at least 2 of these features, you may be diagnosed with PCOS.

## What are Polycystic ovaries?

Polycystic ovaries contain a large number of harmless follicles that are up to 8mm (approximately 0.3in) in size. 
The follicles are underdeveloped sacs in which eggs develop. In PCOS, these sacs are often unable to release an egg, which means ovulation does not take place.

## How common is PCOS in women in the Philippines?

I googled stats on women who have PCOS in the philippines, and this is what I got.

- In the Philippines, there are around 27.3 million women of reproductive age, defined as between 15 and 49 years old. This group represents a significant portion of the population, and about 10% of these women are affected by PCOS.
- PCOS affects many women of reproductive age, with an estimate of about 4.5 million Filipina patients diagnosed.
- PCOS is the major cause of female infertility in the Philippines with ~4.5M Filipinas are living with PCOS.

## What are the Symptoms of PCOS?

If you have signs and symptoms of PCOS, they'll usually become apparent during your late teens or early 20s.

- Irregular periods or no periods at all
- Difficulty getting pregnant as a result of irregular ovulation or no ovulation
- Excessive hair growth (hirsutism). Usually on the face, chest, back or buttocks
- Weight gain
- Thinning hair and hair loss from the head
- Oily skin or acne

PCOS is also associated with an increased risk of developing health problems in later life, such as type 2 diabetes and high cholesterol levels.

## What causes PCOS?

The exact cause of PCOS is unknown, but it often runs in families.
It's related to abnormal hormone levels in the body, including high levels of insulin.
Insulin is a hormone that controls sugar levels in the body.
Many women with PCOS are resistant to the action of insulin in their body and produce higher levels of insulin to overcome this.
This contributes to the increased production and activity of hormones like testosterone.
Being overweight or obese also increases the amount of insulin your body produces.

## How to treat PCOS?

There's no cure for PCOS, but the symptoms can be treated. See a doctor if you think you may have the condition.
If you have PCOS and you're overweight, losing weight and eating a healthy, balanced diet can make some symptoms better.
Medicines are also available to treat symptoms such as excessive hair growth, irregular periods and fertility problems.
If fertility medicines are not effective, a simple surgical procedure called laparoscopic ovarian drilling (LOD) may be recommended.
This involves using heat or a laser to destroy the tissue in the ovaries that's producing androgens, such as testosterone.
With treatment, most women with PCOS can get pregnant.

